The Project Gutenberg EBook of Exploiter's End, by James Causey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Exploiter's End

Author: James Causey

Release Date: October 7, 2012 [EBook #40970]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EXPLOITER'S END ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                         EXPLOITER'S END

                        _by James Causey_

[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Orbit volume 1
number 2, 1953. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _PEOPLE OR TERMITES, IT'S ALL THE SAME._

_THERE'S A LIMIT TO HOW FAR YOU CAN DRIVE THEM!_]

[Illustration]


We time-studied the Term. It moved with a pliant, liquid grace, its four
arms flickering over the instrument panel, installing studs, tightening
screws, its antennae glowing with the lambent yellow that denoted an
agony of effort.

"See?" Harvey's freckled face was smug. "He rates an easy hundred and
ten. Whoever took that first study--"

"I took it," I said, squinting at the stop watch.

You could hear him bite his lip. After only two weeks on the job, on a
strange planet ninety light-years from home, you don't tell your boss
he's cockeyed.

The Term hurried. Its faceted termite eyes were expressionless diamonds,
but the antennae gleamed a desperate saffron. _If bugs could sweat_, I
thought wryly. Now the quartz panel installation. Those four arms moved
in a blinding frenzy.

But the stop watch was faster. The second hand caught up with the Term.
It passed him. Rating: Seventy-four per cent.

I tucked the clipboard under my arm, squeezed through the airlock, and
down the ramp. Harvey followed sullenly. The conveyor groaned on,
bringing up the next unit, a sleek little cruiser. The Term seized a
fifty-pound air wrench, fled up the ramp to the airlock.

"A dozen feet back to the operation," I pointed out. "After the next job
he'll have to return forty feet. Then sixty. He's in the hole."

Harvey looked at his shoes. John Barry, the trim superintendent, came
puffing down the line, his jowled face anxious about direct labor cost,
the way every good super should be. "Anything wrong, Jake?"

"He can't cut it," I said.

Barry frowned up through the airlock at the Term. Those antennae now
shone the soft sad purple of despair.

We walked past the body jigs. The air was a haze of blue smoke,
punctuated with yellow splashes of flame from the electronic welding
guns. Terms scuttled like gigantic spiders over the great silver hulls,
their antennae glowing in a pattern of swift bright harmony, right on
standard, good cost. Harvey's face was rapt as he watched them. I said
harshly:

"Give me your third Production Axiom."

Harvey's shoulders squared. He said stiffly: "Beauty is functional. The
quintessence of grace is the clean, soaring beauty of a spaceship's
hull--"

"Extrapolate, Harvey."

His lips were tight. "What I see is ugly. Terms must be taught
individuality. What I see is a fascinating, deadly beauty--deadly
because it's useless. We must sublimate it, grind it down, hammer it out
into a useful pattern. Waste motion is a sin...."

"Excellent."

We turned into the administration lift, leaving the iron roar behind us,
and on the way up Harvey didn't say a word. I listened for the tinkle of
shattering ideals, and said patiently, "You're here to build spaceships.
To build them better and cheaper than Consolidated or Solar. Hell, we've
even set up a village for the Terms! Electricity, plumbing, luxuries
they wouldn't normally enjoy for the next million years--"

"Will they fire him?" Harvey's voice was flat.

My temper was shredding. "Four-day layoff. His third this month. Terms
kick in most of their salary for village maintenance. They can't afford
a part-time producer."

I could see that Term read out of the gang, leaving the company village,
stoically, while his fellows played a wailing dirge of color on their
antennae. The farewell song. I could see him trudging over the windswept
peak of Cobalt Mountain, staring down at his native village, and shaking
with the impact of the _Stammverstand_, the tribe-mind, the ache and the
longing. A wheel, shaken out of orbit. The lonely cog, searching for its
lost slot. I could see that Term returning to his tribe. And how they'd
tear him to pieces because he was a thing apart, now, an alien.

We walked down the gray corridor, past Psych, past the conference hall,
to the silver door marked _Methods and Standards_. Harvey's blue eyes
were remote, stubborn. I clapped him paternally on the shoulder. "Anyone
can call one wrong, lad. Forget it."

Harvey slumped down at a computor, and I walked into my private office
and shut the door. Harvey's personnel dossier was in my desk. I.Q. 178,
fair. Stability quotient two point eight, very bad. Adaptability rating
point seven, borderline. Those idiots in Psych! Couldn't they
indoctrinate a new man properly?

I waited.

In a moment Harvey came in without knocking and said, "Mr. Eagan, I want
to quit."

I took my time lighting a cigar, not raising my head.

His defiant, pleading look.

I blew smoke rings at the visicom and finally said, "Since you were
sixteen, you've dreamed of this. Elimination tests, the weeding out, ten
thousand other smart, hungry kids fighting you for this job." I tasted
the words. "When your contract's up you can write your own ticket
anywhere in the system."

He blurted: "I came here full of ideas about the wonderful work
Amalgamated was doing to advance backward civilizations. Sure, the Terms
have a union. They're paid at standard galactic rates for spacecraft
assembly. But you make them live in that village. It costs to run that
village. You give it to them with one hand and take it back with the
other. All the time you're holding out the promise of racial
advancement, individuality, some day the Terms will reach the stars.
Nuts!"

"That's Guild propaganda," I said softly.

"The Guild is just a bogey you created to keep the Intersolar
Spacecrafters Union in line. There's a Venusport liner due in next week.
When it leaves I'll be on it!"

I played Dutch Uncle. I told him he wasn't used to Terminorb's
one-and-a-half gravs, that this was just a hangover from the three to
five oxygen ratio he wasn't used to. But he said no. Finally I shrugged,
scribbled something on an AVO and handed it to him. "All right, Harvey,"
I said mildly. "Take this down to Carmody, in Psych. He'll give you a
clearance."

Harvey's face went white. "Since when do you go to Psych for a
clearance?"

I pressed a stud under the desk and two Analysts came in. I told them
what to do and Harvey screamed; he fought and bit and clawed, he mouthed
unutterable things about what we were doing to the Terms until I chopped
him mercifully behind the ear.

"Poor devil," panted one of the Analysts. "Obviously insufficient
indoctrination, sir. Would you mind if I spent an hour in Psych for
reorientation? He--he upset me."

My eyes stung with pride. Sam had loyalty plus. "Sure thing, Sam. You'd
better go too, Barney. He said some pretty ugly things."

[Illustration]

They dragged Harvey out and I went over to the visicom, punched a
button. I was trembling with an icy rage as Carmody's lean hawk face
swam into view. "Hello, Jake," he said languidly. "How's Cost?"

I told him curtly about Harvey. "Another weak sister," I rasped. "Can't
you screen them any more? Didn't you note his stability index? I'm going
to report this to Starza, Don."

"Relax," Carmody smiled. "Those things happen, Jake. We'll do a few
gentle things with scalpel and narcosynthesis, and he'll be back in a
week, real eager, the perfect cost analyst."

I'd never liked Carmody. He was so smug; he didn't realize the
_sacredness_ of his position. I said coldly, "Put Miss Davis on."

Carmody's grin was knowing. The screen flickered, and Fern's face came
into focus. Her moist red lips parted, and I shivered, looking at her,
even on a visicom screen. The shining glory of her hair, those cool
green eyes. Three months hadn't made a difference.

"How was little old Earth?" I said awkwardly.

"Wonderful!" She was radiant. "I'll see you for lunch."

"Today's grievance day. Dinner?"

"I promised Don," she said demurely.

I swallowed hard. "How about the Term festival tomorrow night?"

"Well, Don sort of asked--"

I tried to laugh it off and Fern said she'd see me later and the screen
went blank and I sat there shaking.

The screen flickered again. Starza's great moon face smiled at me and
said sweetly, "We're ready to start grieving."

I picked up the time studies that were death sentences for two Terms,
and went down the hall to ulcer gulch, the conference room.

Lure a termite away from his tribe. Promise him the stars. Make him bust
his thorax on an assembly line. He makes a wonderful worker, with
reflexes twice as fast as a human's, but he still isn't an individual.
Even when putting a spaceship together, he's still part of the tribe,
part of a glowing symphony of color and motion. That's bad for
production. Accent on individuality, that was the keynote. The Terms and
their union representatives could argue a grievance right to the letter
of the contract, but when it came to production standards we had them.
Terminorb IV was ninety light-years from the system, and the Terms
couldn't afford a home office time and motion analyst. It wasn't worth
it. Terms were expendable.

Los Tichnat was committeeman at large for the Term local. He sat regally
at the head of the conference table, seven gleaming chitinous feet of
him, with his softly pulsating antennae and faceted eyes, and said in a
clicking, humorless voice, "The first item is a second-stage grievance.
Brother Nadkek, in final assembly, was laid off for one day. Reason: He
missed an operation. The grievance, of course, is a mere formality. You
will deny it."

Dave Starza winked at me from behind horn-rimmed glasses. He sat like
some great bland Buddha, Director of Industrial Relations, genius in
outer psychology, ruthless, soft-spoken, anticipator of alien trends. He
said in that beautiful velvet voice, "Ordinarily, yes. In this case
Nadkek wished to ask his foreman about omitting a welding phase of the
operation. While the suggestion was declined, Nadkek showed unmistakable
initiative." Starza stressed the word. "We appreciate his interest in
the job. He will receive pay for the lost day."

Around the table, antennae flashed amazed colors. A precedent had been
set. Interest in the job transcended even the Contract.

"Management _sustains_ the grievance?" Tichnat droned incredulously.

"Of course," Starza said.

Nadkek left the conference room, his antennae a puzzled mauve.

"Next," Starza said pontifically.

The next grievance was simply that a foreman had spoken harshly to a
Term. The Term resented it. In his tribe he had been a fighter, prime
guardian of the Queen-Mother. Fighters could not be reprimanded as could
spinners or workers.

Starza and Tichnat split hairs while I dozed and thought about Fern.

Starza finally promised to reprimand the foreman. It was lovely, the way
he thumped on the table, aflame with righteousness, his voice golden
thunder, the martyr, hurt by Tichnat's unfairness, yet so eager to
compromise, to be fair. The next grievance was work standards. Starza
looked at me. This one mattered. This was cost.

I pulled out my study proofs, said, "Radnor, in final assembly.
Consistently in the hole. Rating, seventy-four percent--"

"_The operation was too tight, Jake. Admit it!_"

The thought uncoiled darkly, thundering and reverberating in the
horrified caverns of my brain.

A thoughtcaster. So the Guild had thoughtcasters now. The Guild had
finally come.

I sat in the dank silence, shaking. A drop of ice crawled slowly down my
temple. I stared around the conference table at Starza's frown, at those
Term faces, the great faceted eyes.

"We gave this worker every chance," I said, licking my lips. "We put him
on another operation. He still couldn't cut it. Even though we've got
production to meet, we still give as many chances--"

The thought slashed. It grew into a soundless roar.

"_Stop it, Jake! Tell them how Amalgamated, under the cloak of
liberation, is strangling the Terms with an alien culture. Tell them
what a mockery their contract really is! Tell them about that Term you
condemned this morning!_"

I fought it. Feeling the blood run from my lip, I fought it. I'd seen
strong men driven insane by a thoughtcaster within seconds. My stability
index was six point three. Damned high. I fought it. I got to my feet.
The room reeled. Those damned Term faces. The shining antennae. I
stumbled towards the door. The thought became a whiplash of molten fury.

"_Uphold that grievance, Jake! Tell them the truth. Admit the standard
was impossible to meet--_"

I slammed the door. The voice stopped.

My skull was a shattered fly-wheel, a sunburst of agony. I was retching.
I stumbled down the corridor to Psych. Fern was there. I was screaming
at her. The Guild was here. They had thoughtcasters. My brain was
melting. Fern was white-faced. She had a hypo. I didn't feel it. The
last thing I saw was the glimmer of tears in her green eyes.

       *       *       *       *       *

"... the neuron flow." Starza's voice. "No two alike. Like fingerprints.
What a pity they can't refine the transmittal waves."

I tried to open my eyes.

"The Guild atomized Solar's plant on Proycon," Carmody's voice said
quietly. "It's just a question of time, Dave."

"No," Starza said thoughtfully. "Proycon was a sweatshop. I think maybe
they're hinting that our production standards are a trifle rough. Look,
his eyelids fluttered. Bet you he takes refuge in amnesia."

"You lose." My voice was an iron groan.

We were in Starza's office. Carmody peered at me with a clinical eye. "I
took the liberty of narcosynthesis while you were out, Jake. You told us
all about it. How do you feel?"

I told them how I felt, in spades.

"I want my vacation now," I said. "I've accrued seven months. I'm going
to Venus," I said.

"Now, now," Starza said. "Mustn't desert the sinking ship, Jake." I shut
my eyes. His voice was soothing oil. "Jake, the Guild as a whole doesn't
know of this plant. Guild agents are free-lancers, in the full sense of
the word. They exercise their own initiative, and only report to Guild
HQ when the job is done."

"Then," Carmody said, "if we can find out who--"

"Precisely." Starza's eyes were veiled. "Incidentally, Don, you've been
gone the last four days. Why?"

Carmody regarded him steadily. "Recruiting. You knew that."

"Yet you brought back only a dozen Terms."

Carmody drew a slow deep breath. "Word's gotten around, Dave. The
tribes have finally forgotten their petty wars and united against a
common enemy. Us! Any Term that exhibits undesirable traits of
individuality is now destroyed. I think a dozen was a good haul."

"You had the whole planet."

Carmody's grin was diamond hard. "You think maybe I spent a few hours
under a Guild mind-control? Is that it?"

Starza said, "On your way out, send Los Tichnat in."

Carmody flushed. "Tichnat's the one and you know it! But if he's not--if
you haven't run down the spy by tomorrow--you can accept my resignation.
I saw what they left of Proycon."

The door slammed behind him. Starza smiled at me. "What do you think,
Jake?"

"Tichnat. The second I got out of there, the thoughtcaster stopped."

"Doesn't mean a thing. They can beam through solid rock. Hundred-foot
radius."

"No exploitation," I mused.

"Fanatics," Starza said. "They'd impede the progress of man. Sacrifice
man's rightful place in the cosmos for the sake of--crawling things!
We'll fight them, Jake!"

Tichnat entered. He stood stiffly before Starza's desk, his antennae a
cheerful emerald.

Starza said carefully, "What do you know about the Guild?"

"Impractical visionaries," Tichnat clicked. "Lovers of statis,
well-meaning fools. They approached me yesterday."

A vein throbbed purple in Starza's forehead. Yet he kept his voice soft.
"And you didn't report it?"

"And precipitate a crisis?" Tichnat sounded amused. "I was asked if my
people were being persecuted. Had I answered in the affirmative there
might have been repercussions, perhaps a sequel to Proycon. Oh yes, we
know of Proycon. Your foremen are sometimes indiscreet."

"Who was the agent?" Starza breathed.

"Should I tell you, and disrupt the status quo? You would destroy the
agent. In retaliation, the Guild might destroy this plant."

"Impossible! Guild agents have no such authority--"

"A chance I cannot afford to take." Tichnat was adamant.

"Amalgamated," Starza prodded, "offers a standing reward of one hundred
thousand solar credits for apprehension of any Guild agent. Your village
could use those credits. You could equip an atomic lab. You could
maintain your own research staff--"

"Stop it." The antennae throbbed brilliantly.

"We are your friends, Tichnat."

"Symbiosis, I believe is the word," Tichnat clicked dryly. "You need us.
We need your science. We need your terrifying concept of individuality.
We need to lose our old ways. The dance of harvest time. The
Queen-Mother. One by one the rituals drop away. The old life, the good
tribal life, is dying. You sift out us misfits who chafe at tribal
oneness, you offer us the planets!"

The antennae flashed an angry scarlet. "You think to keep us chained a
millennium. A hundred years will suffice. We will leave you. We exiles
you have made, we who would be destroyed if we dared return to the
tribe, we shall rule this world! You aliens drive a hard bargain, but
the dream is worth it!"

Prometheus, in a bug's body. The shining strength, and the dark terrible
pride.

"It is no dream," Starza said gently. "But perhaps you go about
achieving it the wrong way. You still refuse to divulge the spy?"

"I am sorry. Good day."

Starza brooded after him.

"He's a fool. But he's grasping mankind's concepts, Jake. I'd give my
right eye for a good semanticist! Basic English does it. _Self_, _want_,
_mine_, selfish ego-words, the cornerstones of grasping humanity. Sure,
we'll raise hell with their esthetic sense, but in the end they'll thank
us."

I sat, worrying about a secret fanatic somewhere in the plant who, in
the holy interests of Mars-for-the-Martians, Terminorb-for-the-Terms,
might soon plant an atomic warhead in our body shop. I finally said,
"What are we going to _do_?"

"Do?" Starza chuckled. "Why, slacken line speeds, lower production
standards, fifty percent at least. By tomorrow we'll be down to forty
jobs an hour. They want loose standards, we'll give it to them."

"But my _cost_?"

"Obscenity your cost. Look, Jake, no matter how you set an operation up,
the Terms manage to work in some glittering little ritual. They _have_
to create beauty. Their esthetic sense must be fed. They can't adjust to
quick change. Supposing you cut line speeds by ten per cent. They
adjust, but it almost kills them. Then drop thirty per cent. Their
ritual loses timing, becomes discordant. What happens?"

I blinked. "They go mad."

"And our little Guild saboteur will be guilty of a few Term deaths.
He'll have violated a basic Guild tenet. He'll go home with his tail
between his legs. Catch?"

I caught.

By midafternoon we had the conveyor speeds down thirty per cent. The red
line on my cost chart soared precariously. The entire production line
slowed to a crawl. We waited.

At five o'clock it happened. Three Terms in the body shop went mad. It
started a chain reaction throughout the trim line. Six more Terms ran
amuck and had to be destroyed. Final assembly became a shambles. Starza
called me on the visicom, delighted. "Our Guild agent played right into
our hands, Jake. In forcing a production slump he's harming the workers.
His next move will probably be a bluff."

I wasn't so sure.

That evening the executive dining room was choked with a tight, gnawing
tension. Department heads spoke in hushed whispers, eyes darting. The
man across the table could be a mindless-controlled, a Guild pawn. Smile
at him politely and keep your mouth shut. I ordered _thar_, a Terminorb
arthapod that was usually more delicious than Venusian lobster, but
tonight it tasted like broiled leather. It was like eating in a morgue.

I saw Carmody, at the next table. I nodded coolly to him and he hitched
his chair over and said, "By the way, Jake, I'm sorry about Harvey. He's
going back to Earth next week."

"Why?"

"His stability index was too low," Carmody said smoothly. "Sure, we
could have given him the works, but you didn't want a robot."

I said deliberately, "I needed that boy, Don."

Carmody got up, his smile infinitely contemptuous. "We don't all have
your stability index, Jake."

I stared after him, and the thought suddenly struck me that not once had
_I_ considered quitting, ever. Somehow, the thought disturbed me.

Abruptly the public address speaker boomed.

"Attention," Starza's voice crackled. "To the Guild agent, wherever he
may be. Today you murdered thirty-seven Terms. Is this your altruism? Is
this your vaunted justice?" He went on, his voice like organ music,
sweeping away all doubt, making you proud and glad to be a part of
Amalgamated, part of Production, when quite suddenly his voice choked
off. Simultaneously another voice ripped through the hall. A cold ironic
whisper, lashing at the mind.

"_Altruism, yes. But not as you conceive it. Today you passed your own
judgment. You have twenty-four hours to evacuate before this Plant is
destroyed. The verdict is final._"

The dining hall echoed with moans. Hands leaned to agonized temples. The
thoughtcaster again, on a wide band frequency. Through the pain I was
conscious of Starza's voice. The Guild was trying to bluff us. We
wouldn't let them. I stumbled out of the hall, my teeth chattering, took
the lift down to the first level, and got outside, to walk free in the
park.

Here was Eden. Giant conifers and ferns wove a cool green pattern of
delight, and the laughter of the crystal fountains soothed. Terms had
fashioned this garden, had created a poem in living green, a quiet fugue
of _oneness_, each leaf blending exquisitely with the next, the unity,
the perfect whole. For one weak moment I let the pattern seep
insidiously into me, and then, ashamed, focused my eyes on that jarring
splash of white in the center of the garden. The ten-foot model of the
Amalgamated X-3M, squat with power, lifting on her stern jets. A symbol
of Amalgamated's strength, the indomitable spirit of mankind, beauty
born of pure utility. Oddly, a half-remembered poem of the Ancients
flitted through my brain:

    _Dirty British Coaster with her salt-caked smokestack,
    Butting through the Channel on the mad March days--_

That was man.

On an infinity of planets he had met resistance, through force, through
guile--even through beauty. And he had conquered. I drew a slow deep
breath and sat on one of the benches, staring up at the gigantic
horseshoe of the factory, hearing the muted hum of the atomics.
Twenty-four hours.

I tried to run through my axioms, and I was suddenly terrified. I
couldn't remember them! That damned thoughtcaster. Twice in one day.
Perhaps there was some gradual neural disintegration. My head hurt
terribly. Tomorrow I'd go to Psych for a checkup. I thought about that
marble villa in Venusport, and about my bank account. Not enough.
Another year, just one more year, and I could retire, at thirty-four. I
thought about the Venusian twilights, and the turquoise mists off the
Deeps, and wondered dully if I'd ever see Venus or the Earth again.

I saw Fern, walking among the conifers, her face a pale mask of strain.
"You heard it, Jake?"

I nodded.

We sat in the aquamarine twilight, and Fern was shivering, and I put my
arm around her.

"Looks like altruism is a relative thing," I said. "What _do_ they
want?"

"Uncontaminated Terms," she said bitterly. "No science, no stars, no
wars and no progress. A big beautiful planet-mind, the Term mind,
forever static, forever dead."

"It's a bluff," I said. "Our little fanatic's stalling for time, hoping
to stampede us while he finds another way."

"For example?"

"Why do you think we insist on basic English for all Terms? Supposing a
foreman should start jabbering Terminese during an operation. The Terms
would revert, we'd have a line shutdown. They can't adjust--say!" A
random thought was nibbling at my brain. "Where was Carmody this
morning? Just before I reeled in?"

Her fine brows knitted. "Why, he went--oh, Jake, surely you don't
think--?"

"Went where?"

"Down the hall. Towards Personnel."

"Towards the conference hall, you mean. He never even examined Harvey!"

"It wasn't necessary," she said uncomfortably. "Don just wanted to
verify his stability index."

"Sure! So he stood outside the conference hall and put a whammy on me--"

Fern was smiling. I scowled. "It fits. It has to be him."

"Or Tichnat," she said. "Or Starza. Or me."

I stared at her. "You'd do." My voice shook. "You were gone three
months. They could have got to you."

Her rich, warm laughter sifted through the twilight, and I wanted to hit
her. "They did," she gurgled, "but I've decided to relent, Jake. I'll
spare the plant on one condition--that you take me to the Term festival
tomorrow night."

I grunted. "Carmody working overtime, I suppose?"

"If the plant's still standing."

I changed the subject.

Two hours later Starza called a council of war.

       *       *       *       *       *

The conference room was crammed with quivering executives. Starza
carefully let the tension build to a shrill crescendo before he said:

"One of you gentlemen is a Guild mindless-controlled."

Ragged silence. Starza's smile was very faint.

"You gave us an ultimatum. But destroying this plant is an admission of
failure you're not willing to make--yet. You'll try another tack. You're
just beginning to discover that this environment we've created for the
Terms is superior to the primitive jungle. Tichnat!"

Tichnat stepped forward. His antennae were a proud, brilliant gold.

"Do you want a shutdown?" Starza asked softly.

"Are we fools?" Tichnat clicked. "To lose what we've gained? To return
to our tribe? To be destroyed?"

Starza's calm gaze caressed each face, probing. "You see? Stalemate.
Whoever you are, _you're bluffing_. Tomorrow our conveyor speeds return
to normal. You'll do nothing. You may try to agitate the Terms, but
they're satisfied--"

One of the superintendents cleared his throat. "Look," he said
unsteadily, "sometimes you can't afford to call a bluff."

Starza said pleasantly, "Any resignations will be accepted right now.
You can wait safely in the Term village until next week's freighter
arrives. No repercussions, I promise."

The lie was blatant. Carmody stood by the door, his smile strained. It
was all too obvious what would happen to any resignees.

"None?" Starza's brows rose. "I'm proud of you. That's it, gentlemen."

The next day was a frenetic nightmare. My cost dropped, but it didn't
matter. That was one day when the best company man became a
clock-watcher. Line foremen, department heads, cracked under the strain,
and were summarily removed to Psych. Carmody and staff worked overtime.

[Illustration]

I toiled feverishly over operation schedules, the crazily fluctuating
cost charts. My headache was gone, but I still couldn't remember my
axioms! I felt guilty over not going to Psych, but there just wasn't the
time.

Hell, _I'd_ never needed indoctrination. I was an Amalgamated man
through and through. Finally I grabbed an engineering manual, leafed
angrily through it--and sat there, empty and shaking.

I'd gone insane.

The words were gibberish. Oh, I could read them all right, but they
didn't make _sense_. What a filthy trick. Semantic block, Starza would
call it. I kept staring at the meaningless words, conscious of a tearing
sense of loss. And I wanted to cry.

Six o'clock was zero hour.

Six o'clock came, and the factory held its collective breath while
nothing happened.

At six-thirty Starza made a long speech over the public address. About
the selfless spirit of man, helping the Terms reach the stars, about how
we would never admit defeat, and about how, after tonight, the Term
festival would be discontinued. The Terms had adopted mankind's culture,
they had no further need of their effete native customs.

At seven, Fern and I were walking past Administration towards the
lighted square-mile enclosure of the Term village. Fern had never seen a
festival.

"A throwback," I said, "to their old tribal days. Their harvest, when
they pay tribute to the Queen-Mother and pray for good crops and work
well done. It's their yearly substitute for _Stammverstand_. Back in the
native villages, whenever a Term's in trouble, he goes to the council
hut and the others join him in a silent, group telepathy. But we've just
about weaned them, angel! They'll be individuals soon."

We walked down the deserted row of Term huts, past the council hall, to
the great stone amphitheatre, and sat with the other execs. Fern was
very gay and cheerful, but I kept thinking about my axioms, trying to
bring them back to life. I felt dead, all dead inside.

Starza came up, frowning, and I congratulated him.

"It's too pat, Jake, it worries me. Where's Carmody?"

"Setting up those semantic reaction tests you gave him," Fern said.

"But I never gave him--"

Abruptly the lights snuffed out. At one end of the arena loomed a
twelve-foot statue of a bloated Term, limned in a soft pale glow. The
Queen-Mother.

The hush. Then the radiance.

Slowly the Terms filed into the arena, rank upon rank of living flame.
First the fighters, their antennae shining crimson and splendid against
the tall night. Then the twins glows of blue that denoted the spinners,
the weavers. The golden blaze of the harvesters. The lambent colors
crept through the air like a mood, like a dream, and deepened into a
shimmering cataract of rainbow fire, a paean of light and glory that
whirled and spun in a joyous rhythm as old as the race itself.

Then--chaos.

A blinding flare cascaded from the six-foot antennae of the statue. The
radiance grew, brighter than an atomic flare, more terrible than the
sun. The Terms stood frozen. Beside me, Starza swore.

This wasn't in the script.

That colossal voice.

Ear-snapping clicks, and liquid vowels. Terminese. The forbidden tongue.
The voice blared. I caught most of it.

"_Children, you have sinned. You are defiled with the taint of alien
monsters. You have failed the Queen-Mother. Return, my children, return
to your tribes. Return to the tabernacle of unity, the one-in-all, the
Queen-Mother! For in death there is life, and there is joy in
immolation. Return!_"

Lastly, the climax. That last shattering hunk of propaganda that would
have been so tritely amusing if it hadn't been so terrifying.

"_You have nothing to lose but your chains._"

The giant antennae faded to a liquid silver. The silver of hope, of
forgiveness.

For a moment I was blind. I felt Fern trembling against me. The execs
were chattering like frightened sheep. Then I could see. I saw Starza.
He was moving down the aisle, cursing in a tight, dull monotone.

I followed him down into the arena. The Terms stood shriveled, mute.
Starza was fumbling at the base of the statue, and he said in a thick
horrible voice, "Look." The loudspeaker. The coiled wiring.

The Terms stirred.

Starza leaped to the lap of the statue. He bawled, "Listen! This is
sacrilege! You have been victims of a hoax--"

Not listening, they filed in silent groups out of the arena. Their
antennae were the color of ashes. Starza jumped down. He pounded after
them. He was shouting at Los Tichnat.

"I know," Tichnat droned. He kept walking. "You are right. It does not
matter that you are right. The Queen-Mother called."

"Listen," Starza mouthed. "It was a fraud, a trick. You can't--"

"We must." Tichnat paused. For a long moment the great faceted eyes
stared somberly. "It was a splendid dream, the thing you offered us. But
this is the final reality. And yours is but a dream."

He tramped stolidly on, after the others. The council hall door closed.

Starza clawed at the door. It opened. He was too late. They sat silently
around the great table, the faceted eyes dead, the antennae coruscating
indigo, now green, now rose. Communion. The meshing of minds. Starza
shouted at them. Stillness.

Starza looked blindly at me. He was shaking. "Carmody," he said.
"Carmody knows the Term mind. He can do something. Come on," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

We found Carmody in his quarters, methodically packing. His eyebrows
rose as we burst in. "Did you gentlemen ever try knocking?"

Starza just looked at him. Carmody drew a long breath. "You'll find my
resignation on your desk, Dave."

"Ah?" Starza's voice was very soft.

"It's only a question of time," Carmody said. "Call it the rat deserting
the ship if you like, but I'm through."

Starza was smiling, a fat man's smile. "So you really think you can pull
it off," he whispered.

Carmody shrugged, and Starza calmly took out a sonic pistol and shot him
in the belly.

A sonic blast hemorrhages. It rends the capillaries, ploughs the flesh
into a flaccid collection of shattered nerve fibers and ruined arteries.
It's a rotten way to die.

Starza watched Carmody thrash himself to death on the floor. I turned
away.

"For the record, Jake, he made a full confession. We both heard him."

"Just for the record," I said.

"It had to be him," Starza said. "That thoughtcaster blast yesterday
morning made reference to your study on the Term. Only Harvey and
Carmody knew about that. It couldn't have been Harvey. He cut his throat
this morning.

"I've decided," Starza said. "This is a Type L planet, after all. The
natives are chronically unstable. Hostile, in fact. Pursuant to Solar
Regulation 3, we have the right to enforce martial law. It should be six
months before an investigation. Meanwhile--"

"We'll get production," I said.

"We'll get production." He wiped his forehead, relaxed. "I'll send in a
full report tonight. Better turn in, Jake," he said kindly. "I'll need
you in the morning."

I turned in.

You lie awake, staring into the blackness. It gnaws.

My head throbbed. I should have felt a triumphant relief, but I could
not remember my axioms, and I felt a sick dull hate for the thing the
Guild spy Carmody had done to me. What happens when you strip a man of
everything he believes in?

He remembers other things.

Those memories came trooping back like ghosts and I fought them,
sweating, but they came. Once upon a time, there was a starry-eyed young
engineer who started out to set the galaxy on fire. But he got
squeamish, somewhere along the way. So Carmody operated on him. Carmody
did things to his brain, made a good production man out of him.

I remembered now.

That time I had argued with Starza about standards, nine years ago. And
I had resigned. And Starza sent me to Psych.

Good old Carmody.

There never would be a white marble villa on Venus. It was a harmless
dream, a substitute for what I had lost. But it didn't matter! Those
superimposed patterns had been removed, that thoughtcaster had crippled
my thinking, but, by Heaven, I was still an Amalgamated man! They
couldn't take that away.

But Starza had been wrong about Carmody.

Nothing definite. But when you dedicate your life into extrapolating
curves, frozen chunks of time and motion, into the thunder of jets
lifting Amalgamated ships from Terminorb, your mind becomes a very
efficient analogue computor, if you know how to use. I used it now. I
fed little things, facts, variables, into that computor, and it told me
three times. Probability: sixty percent at least.

I got up, dressed stiffly. I was trembling. I could still serve, after
all.

I took the lift up to Administration, and walked down that long gray
corridor on leaden feet towards the illuminated rectangle of Starza's
office.

I opened the door.

"Hello, darling," Fern said.

       *       *       *       *       *

She was unhurriedly burning Starza's report. Starza sat mutely in his
chair, head tilted back at an impossible angle, staring at nothing.

"It had to be you." I had never felt so tired. "You would have destroyed
the plant, wouldn't you? Only I showed you another way. Make the Terms
revert. And you had that hypo all ready when I reeled into Psych." I
moved towards her carefully. "You're so damned altruistic. A Guild
mindless-controlled," I said.

Fern's smile was compassionate. She methodically ground the ashes to
powder, lifted that calm green gaze.

"Stupid words to frighten children, Jake. Yes, they kidnapped me. I
never reached Earth, three months ago. I was indoctrinated--oh, they
didn't have far to go. _Each race to its own fulfillment._" Her eyes
were shining. "Look out the window."

Numbly, I moved past her. I stared. In the distant blackness, a column
of living flame flickered up the slope of Cobalt Mountain. Ice-green,
ruby, silver and blue. The Terms were leaving.

"They're not ready for individuality yet," Fern breathed. "In a million
years perhaps. Not now. They're going home."

"To die."

"The race will live. Individuality isn't the penultimate, darling.
You'll find out." I moved towards her. "You've got a very tough mind,
Jake. You'll make a wonderful Guild agent--"

I got both hands on her throat.

Fern moved. Her right arm was a snake striking, and a steel strength
lifted me, turning, against one and a half gravities, and the floor
wavered up to hit me in the face. Something broke. I tasted blood.

Through the agony, I moved. I crawled towards her.

"They gave me six weeks of hand combat under two gravs," she said. "Soon
you'll be one of us, Jake. One of the Guild!"

I stared up at her in a dull horror. I kept crawling.

"We'll heal you," Fern said. "We'll give you back the dream. We may even
work together! Maybe I'll fall in love with you again, who knows?" Her
eyes were brimming. She took out a sonic pistol. "It's all right,
darling. I'll adjust it for knockout. In three hours we'll be on a Guild
flier. Please, darling," she said, and I kept crawling. And Fern's smile
was a benediction as she pulled the trigger.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Exploiter's End, by James Causey

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EXPLOITER'S END ***

***** This file should be named 40970.txt or 40970.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/9/7/40970/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
